Article

                                                                 Comparative Political Studies
                                                                 2025, Vol. 58(6) 1199–1237
Coordination Rights,                                             © The Author(s) 2024


Competition Law and                                              Article reuse guidelines:
                                                                 sagepub.com/journals-permissions
Varieties of Capitalism                                          DOI: 10.1177/00104140241259461
                                                                 journals.sagepub.com/home/cps




Chase Foster1  and Kathleen Thelen2 


Abstract
Competition law is a constitutive institution in capitalist markets, establishing
the rules for when interﬁrm coordination is allowed and where competition is
required (Paul, 2020). Yet comparativists have spent decades debating the
varieties of capitalism framework—which places the issue of coordination at
the center of the distinction between capitalist types—while paying virtually
no attention to cross-national variation in antitrust rules. This article develops
an original theoretical framework to conceptualize the relationship between
competition law and the organization of capitalism. We go beyond the usual
binaries (coordinated vs. liberal market economies, “restrictive” vs. “per-
missive” antitrust regimes) to disentangle two dimensions of the law that
fundamentally shape patterns of coordination and competition both across
regulatory jurisdictions and over time. Applying our framework to analyze the
evolution of American and European competition law, we show how a
comparative coordination rights framework can be used to conceptualize key
institutional changes within contemporary capitalist systems.




1
SOAS University of London, London, UK
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, US

Corresponding Author:
Chase Foster, School of Finance & Management, SOAS University of London, 10 Thornhaugh St,
London WC1H 0XG, UK.
Emails: cf49@soas.ac.uk, foster.chase@gmail.com
Data Availability Statement included at the end of the article


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1200                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

Keywords
EU politics and policy, political economy, business and politics, law and
political economy, American politics, regulatory policy, antitrust law



Introduction
Nearly a century and a half after the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, the ascent
of mega-companies such as Amazon and Apple has put “monopoly power”
and antitrust back in the headlines. Legal scholars and economists have begun
to analyze recent developments in competition policy, but with the notable
exception of a few EU scholars, students of the comparative political economy
of the rich democracies have not had much at all to say about antitrust law and
enforcement.1 This is peculiar, because competition law is a key constitutive
institution in capitalist markets, establishing the rules for where interﬁrm
coordination is allowed and where competition is required.2 Yet even the
dominant varieties of capitalism literature – which famously distinguishes
political economies according to the institutional features that support two
distinct models of coordination – is strikingly silent when it comes to the role
of competition law and policy in structuring markets.
    This gap is consequential because both the American and European po-
litical economies have undergone massive structural changes over the past
four decades that are linked to competition law changes, but have ﬂown under
the radar of dominant theories of CPE. Speciﬁcally, the US has diverged from
fellow liberal market economies, migrating from a classically liberal model to
become highly oligopolistic in a trend that tracks signiﬁcant developments in
American antitrust theory and jurisprudence that the CPE literature has largely
ignored (Philippon, 2019). Meanwhile, Europe’s coordinated market econ-
omies have experienced a mix of changes that are also connected to com-
petition law developments. Some of these, such as the liberalization of
regulated industries and the greenlighting of transnational mergers, have
brought European economies closer to the neoliberal model of capitalism
(Buch-Hansen & Wigger, 2010). Other developments, however, such as legal
protections for interﬁrm and worker coordination, and an increasingly pro-
active approach to economic dominance, are more consonant with coordi-
nated market economies (Foster & Thelen, 2023).
    In this article, we propose a general framework for analyzing changes in
competition law and their impact, both across countries and within countries
over time, that helps explain these developments. Building on the legal scholar
Sanjukta Paul’s (2020) seminal reconceptualization of US antitrust law, we
move beyond the usual binaries (liberal vs. coordinated market economies,
“restrictive” vs. “permissive” antitrust regimes) to disentangle change along
two distinct dimensions: in the rules governing horizontal coordination


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                        1201

(between non-dominant economic actors) and those governing hierarchical
coordination (controls imposed by dominant players). Based on these dis-
tinctions, we identify four ideal-typical competition models that reﬂect dif-
ferent combinations of coordination rights: cartelistic competition,
oligopolistic competition, arm’s length competition, and cooperative com-
petition. Furthermore, we show how this framework can be used to understand
important recent and ongoing trajectories of change in the organization of
capitalism.
    We apply our framework to developments over the postwar period in the
US and Europe to show how it yields insights of interest both to VOC scholars
and to EU scholars—highlighting important blind spots in the VOC literature
while also resolving longstanding debates in the EU literature. Speciﬁcally, we
show how changes in the American competition regime since the 1970s and
1980s have moved the US away from the arm’s length relationships and ﬂuid
labor markets traditionally associated with the “liberal” model and toward
highly concentrated oligopolistic product markets and signiﬁcant labor market
rigidities. Turning to Europe, we revisit – and revise – dominant accounts that
emphasize convergence on the US by drawing attention to key dimensions
along which competition rules have diverged sharply from American
developments.
    The paper is organized as follows. We begin our analysis by noting the
striking absence in the comparative political economy literature of substantial
discussion of competition law and its role in shaping the organization of
capitalism cross nationally and over time. We contrast this with the attention
paid to these issues by economists and legal scholars who attribute growing
oligopoly power in American capitalism to changes in antitrust policy and
enforcement since the 1970s. We turn then to unresolved debates among EU
scholars about the extent to which European competition rules have embraced
American practices in ways that undermine the cooperative arrangements that
have long anchored Europe’s alternative model of CMEs.
    We argue that contemporary debates relating both to the US and to Europe
fail to distinguish two distinct dimensions of competition rules: those gov-
erning horizontal coordination between small and medium sized companies
(SMEs) that individually lack market power, and those governing hierarchical
controls by dominant players. We show that different combinations of co-
ordination rights produce four ideal-typical models of competition, and we
apply our framework to conceptualize the trajectories of competition law
change in Europe and the United States. Disentangling the two distinct di-
mensions of coordination allows us to document important continuities in the
US, alongside some convergence by the EU with respect to horizontal co-
ordination, but also – more importantly – to highlight the ways in which the
EU and US have diverged in their approaches to hierarchical coordination. A
ﬁnal section highlights the contribution of the framework we propose to the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1202                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

literature on the comparative political economy of the rich democracies and
beyond.

Theories: Varieties of Competition Law in Political
Economy and Legal Scholarship
The dominant “varieties of capitalism” framework famously distinguishes
political economies according to the institutional features that support two
distinct models of coordination. Liberal market economies, or LMEs, are
those in which “ﬁrms coordinate their activities primarily via hierarchies and
competitive market arrangements,” and in which coordination outside of the
ﬁrm primarily occurs via “arm’s-length exchange of goods or services in a
context of competition and formal contracting” (Hall & Soskice, 2001, p. 8).
Coordinated market economies, or CMEs, by contrast, are characterized by
heavier reliance on non-market institutions, and where ﬁrms are often em-
bedded in arrangements that involve “more extensive relational or incomplete
contracting, network monitoring based on the exchange of private information
inside networks, and more reliance on collaborative, as opposed to com-
petitive, relationships to build the competencies of the ﬁrm” (Ibid).
    Given the centrality within the VOC framework of different modes of
coordination—whether through corporate hierarchy and competitive market
arrangements as in LMEs or through various nonmarket institutions as in
CMES—it is surprising that competition policy has not been a major focus of
comparative capitalism scholarship. Historical treatments of capitalist de-
velopment underscored the central importance of competition law in con-
ditioning national market structures and corporate organization in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries (Berk, 2009; Chandler & Hikino, 2009; Djelic, 2001;
Fligstein, 1993; Keller, 1981; Lamoreaux, 1988; Thelen, 2020, 2024). Yet the
relationship between contemporary capitalist organization and competition
law has not been a major theoretical or empirical focus within the VOC
literature. The introduction to Hall and Soskice’s seminal volume mentions
US antitrust policy in passing (2001: 31), and other chapters address the role
of the law in structuring production regimes (Casper, 2001; Teubner, 2001),
but competition law is not central to the framework and has been neglected by
subsequent VOC scholars.
    Critics of varieties of capitalism have paid somewhat more attention to the
role of competition law. For example, studies emphasizing the common
neoliberal trajectory of capitalist systems have sometimes portrayed com-
petition law as a homogenizing force that reinforces processes of economic
liberalization, ﬁnancialization, and marketization that undermine producer
group coordination and organized capitalism. In particular, the intensiﬁcation
of competition law at the EU level and its enforcement by the European
Commission is often seen as contributing to the disorganization of capitalism


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                         1203

and a gradual convergence on a common liberal model (Buch-Hansen &
Wigger, 2010; Höpner & Schäfer, 2012; Wigger & Nölke, 2007). Such
research has been important for drawing our attention to the ways American
inﬂuence in the post WWII period shaped early developments in Europe, and
how the more recent adoption of some elements of ‘law and economics’
theories (including elements of the so-called “Chicago school” of law and
economics) has affected some areas of policy and enforcement (Bartalevich,
2016; Buch-Hansen & Wigger, 2010). However, in emphasizing liberaliza-
tion, critics have often over simpliﬁed the effects of competition law on
Europe’s coordinated market economies, missing important elements of
continuity in European competition policy as well as new divergences that
have intensiﬁed the enforcement of rules regulating the exploitation of
economic power. Moreover, studies that conﬂate “liberalization” with
“Americanization” often miss the extent to which the US is no longer itself
particularly “liberal.”
    In short, the current state of the debate – mostly absent from VOC
scholarship and viewed primarily as a tool of liberalization among VOC’s
critics – has led CPE scholars to overlook a number of important develop-
ments in the political economies of the advanced industrial countries on both
sides of the Atlantic – developments that have been more central to dis-
cussions within the disciplines of economics and legal studies. In the United
States there is growing evidence that the collapse of antitrust enforcement
following the adoption of ‘Chicago School’ ideas in court jurisprudence and
agency policy (R. A. Posner, 1979) has contributed to growing oligopolistic
power and caused the American economy to drift away from the classic LME
model. The U.S. economy is increasingly characterized not by competitive
and contestable markets and arm’s-length contracting, but rather by oli-
gopolistic market structures, where a handful of entrenched ﬁrms predominate
(Azar et al., 2022; Grullon et al., 2019; Philippon, 2019). Proﬁt rates have
soared to historic highs, particularly in the most concentrated sectors and
among ﬁrms with high numbers of patents, suggesting the presence of market
power (Grullon et al., 2019; Gutiérrez & Philippon, 2018). As pure proﬁts
have increased, labor income shares have fallen, particularly in the most
concentrated industries (Barkai, 2020).
    In addition, labor markets have long since ceased to be characterized by the
kind of ﬂuidity that is a core deﬁning feature of the classic liberal model;
indeed, labor market mobility in the US is at the lowest rate since the Census
Bureau began keeping track.3 Increasing industrial concentration across a
wide range of sectors means that declining regions are often dominated by a
few monopsonistic employers (Azar et al., 2022; Naidu et al., 2018; E. A.
Posner, 2021; Yeh et al., 2022). Workers are increasingly stuck in place by the
lack of opportunity in the country’s most dynamic regions (Autor et al., 2020;
Haﬁz, 2022), declining employer-based beneﬁts (Madrian, 1994), rising


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1204                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

housing costs (Ansell & Cansunar, 2021; Coate & Mangum, 2021), and
employers’ growing use of non-compete and no-poach agreements in em-
ployment contracts (Krueger & Ashenfelter, 2022; E. A. Posner, 2020;
Staszak, 2020).
   Meanwhile, European political economies have developed along a dif-
ferent trajectory. The trend toward greater employer market power observed in
the United States is not observed in the United Kingdom, where labor market
concentration has slightly declined over the last quarter century (CMA, 2024).
A growing body of evidence also suggests that the secular trend toward
increased concentration in product markets is less pronounced in many
European countries. A number of close studies have concluded that economic
concentration levels and markups in Europe have been either stable or
characterized by modest decreases following the integration of the European
single market (Cavalleri et al., 2019; Döttling et al., 2017; Gutiérrez &
Philippon, 2018; Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2024).4 Other studies, using differ-
ent data, have identiﬁed some secular trends similar to the US, toward lower
labor shares (Autor et al., 2020; Piketty, 2014), increases in industrial con-
centration levels (Bajgar et al., 2023; Koltay et al., 2023), and a rise in
consumer markups (De Loecker & Eeckhout, 2018) in many European
countries. However, even in these studies, the observed changes are usually
more modest in magnitude and starting from lower baselines than in the
United States (De Loecker & Eeckhout, 2018; Koltay et al., 2023).
   While Europe’s coordinated market economies have no doubt faced new
pressures stemming from globalization and technological change, they
nevertheless also continue to be characterized by much higher levels of
nonmarket coordination. European trade unions have weakened but they still
retain higher coverage rates than in the United States, particularly in the
private sector (Darvas et al., 2023). European employer and trade associations
have proven even more resilient, with membership levels remaining stable in
most countries since the 1970’s even as their role in collective goods provision
and advocacy has continually evolved (Brandl & Lehr, 2019). Compared to
the United States, EU business associations are denser and less fragmented
(Spillman, 2012; Traxler, 2004) and more actively involved in coordinating
research, standard setting, skills development, and collective bargaining
(Gooberman & Hauptmeier, 2022).5 Comparative business demography
studies clearly indicate that, across most major sectors of the economy, small
and medium sized enterprises continue to play a more prominent role in
European economies (Del Sorbo et al., 2018).
   Existing frameworks have a difﬁcult time accounting for both the shift
toward oligopoly in the US and the mix of continuity and change observed in
Europe. The broad distinction between “liberal” and “coordinated” capitalism
used in VOC theory is not supple enough to capture these developments and
assess their implications. Economic liberalization and convergence


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                              1205

frameworks proposed by VOC critics better account for some elements of
change in the EU, particularly the weakening of labor unions and the
transnational consolidation of industry. However, they are less effective at
explaining how and why the EU has continued to diverge from the US on
other dimensions. And they have very little to say about the oligopolistic
tendencies found in the American economy, or indeed about the dramatic
differences in the treatment of dominant ﬁrms on the two sides of the Atlantic.
   One of the core reasons for this oversight is the tendency of nearly all
observers to view competition law in a unidimensional way. Both VOC
theorists and VOC’s critics conﬂate the different targets of competition law—
whether aimed at horizontal coordination or hierarchical restraints and
mergers. So, any move by a jurisdiction on one dimension (whether pro-
cedural or substantive; whether relating to horizontal or hierarchical coor-
dination; and whether the rules relate to cartels or abuse of dominance) is
coded as signaling more or less stringent competition rules. As closely
connected as these different dimensions are on some issues and at some times,
nothing in the broader historical record suggests that they necessarily go
together. In fact, variation on both dimensions is important for tracking key
changes in the evolution of capitalist organizations over time.


A Comparative Coordination Rights Framework
Building on the work of Sanjukta Paul (2020) we propose a new framework
for analyzing such changes. Among legal scholars of antitrust, Paul is dis-
tinctive in that she conceives of competition regimes not in terms of com-
petition law stringency, but rather in terms of coordination rights. In doing so,
she effectively ﬂips the script of antitrust as it is typically presented: instead of
thinking about competition law as concerned primarily with the regulation of
anti-competitive practices (strict or permissive), she pushes us instead to
consider how competition law allows, permits or even encourages certain
kinds of coordination between ﬁrms and other producer groups, while pre-
venting other kinds. As she puts it: “antitrust law’s core function is to allocate
coordination rights to some economic actors and deny them to others” (382).
Her key insight is that both coordination and competition are required in
capitalism, but that the structure of coordination and competition—and in
particular who gets to coordinate and who is forced to compete—will differ
depending on the competition regime.
    Although Paul did not conceive hers as a framework for comparative
analysis, it can be fruitfully deployed to re-conceptualize cross-national dif-
ferences as well as trajectories of change over time in competition regimes and
in the organization of capitalism writ large. Adapting her framework, we
distinguish between two main dimensions of economic coordination in capi-
talist economies, and use these to conceptualize four competition models that


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1206                                          Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

reﬂect different combinations of coordination rights.6 The ﬁrst dimension is
horizontal coordination beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm. This refers to re-
strictive agreements, practices, or mergers between ﬁrms that lack market power
and that are operating in either the same market or adjacent markets. Horizontal
coordination can thus include restrictive practices between direct competitors
that sell the same or similar products or services. It can also include agreements
between suppliers and distributors as long as none of the involved ﬁrms are
economically dominant. In both cases, competition regimes vary in the extent to
which they permit or forbid such arrangements.
    This is distinct from a second dimension, which we term hierarchical
coordination beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm. This encompasses a range of
unilateral practices, restrictive agreements or mergers involving large com-
panies that have signiﬁcant market shares, with the most extreme example
being the establishment of a monopoly or the erection of a permanent barrier
to entry. Here again, competition regimes vary from more permissive
(“forbearing”) to more restrictive (limiting or restricting such coordination
through state regulation).7
    The emphasis on horizontal or hierarchical coordination rights can and
does differ both across regulatory jurisdictions and historically over time. We
propose that these differences help shape the forms of producer group co-
ordination that have long been central to theories of advanced capitalism.
Based on these distinctions, we identify four ideal-typical competition models
that reﬂect different combinations of horizontal and hierarchical coordination
rights: cartelistic competition, oligopolistic competition, arm’s length com-
petition and cooperative competition. The horizontal dimension of Table 1
refers to the extent to which non-dominant ﬁrms have the right to use
nonmarket forms of coordination in their relationships with competitors,
i.e., ﬁrms selling the same or similar products or services, as well as their
suppliers and distributors. On the left side of the table, horizontal coordination
rights are extensive, while on the right side, they are narrow, and companies
must interact with other ﬁrms primarily through arm’s-length, market-based
contracts. The hierarchical dimension refers to the extent to which dominant
companies have the right to use exclusionary agreements or unilateral
practices to structure the marketplace in their interests. On the permissive
(“forbearing”) side of the continuum, competition regimes enable hierarchical
control by dominant ﬁrms, while on the other end, hierarchical coordination is
subject to state regulation that limits or redirects it.
   These distinctions yield the following four ideal types:

Cartelistic competition model. The regulatory regime in the lower left quadrant
of Table 1 permits ﬁrms to coordinate on both the horizontal and hierarchical
dimensions without being subject to state interference. Since ﬁrms are


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                         1207

Table 1. Coordination Rules and Competition Models.




interested in stabilizing proﬁt expectations by creating ‘market structures’
(Beckert, 2009), this regulatory regime tends to produce cartelized markets,
where competition is partially restricted through private agreements between
producers in the same industry (Schröter, 2013). Cartelistic market structures
have historically facilitated economic stability and growth in some countries
(Tilly, 1982; Webb, 1980), while simultaneously enabling horizontal non-
market coordination institutions to develop (Thelen, 2020). But in the absence
of regulation, the largest cartel members are free to leverage their economic
power over other actors within the economy. This ideal-type is closest to
Japan, Germany, and many other European countries prior to World II, when
states not only permitted but often encouraged interﬁrm coordination and most
industries were highly cartelized.

Oligopolistic Competition Model. The lower right quadrant of Table 1 indicates a
regulatory regime where horizontal coordination between smaller companies
is strictly prohibited, but dominant companies are given wide leeway to create


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1208                                        Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

barriers to entry and impose hierarchical controls on their suppliers and
distributors. In contrast to the cartelized competition model, where the market
is stabilized through horizontal agreements while maintaining ﬁrm inde-
pendence, hierarchical coordination systems rely primarily on corporate hi-
erarchy and economic concentration to stabilize market volatility (Lamoreaux,
1988; Sklar, 1988). This encourages the development of oligopolistic markets,
characterized by a small number of large producers or sellers. Like cartelized
competition, oligopolistic competition can reduce transaction costs and fa-
cilitate economic stability, scale economies, and long-term investment
(Chandler & Hikino, 2009; Williamson, 1985). However, oligopolistic
structures also enable economic exploitation, rent-seeking, and the en-
trenchment of incumbent players. This ideal-type is closest to the United
States at the beginning of the 20th century when horizontal coordination
between smaller ﬁrms and workers was limited by antitrust law while ex-
clusionary practices by large companies were largely permitted as ‘reason-
able’ restraints of trade.

Cooperative Competition Model. The regulatory regime in the top left quadrant
allows competing ﬁrms to extensively cooperate while limiting the power of
dominant companies to impose hierarchical restraints on other ﬁrms. Like
cartelistic competition, ﬁrms and workers are permitted to establish robust
trade associations and unions, which can be used to upgrade competition, and
push the coordinates of competition away from price and toward quality. But
unlike cartelistic competition, the state regulates both exclusionary private
market structures as well as hierarchical controls by dominant companies
(Ergen & Kohl, 2019). This ideal-type can facilitate the development of
coordinated market structures, where competing ﬁrms engage in substantial
nonmarket coordination to facilitate collective goods, reduce problems of free
riding, and pool resources so that smaller ﬁrms can better compete against
bigger ones (Crouch, 1993). Cooperative competition is best exempliﬁed by
many northern European countries during the second half of the 20th century,
when companies were permitted to pursue extensive forms of horizontal
coordination, but where the exploitation of economic power by large com-
panies was strictly regulated by the state or held in check by countervailing
corporatist institutions.

Arm’s-Length Competition Model. A regulatory regime characterized by strict
rules limiting both horizontal and hierarchical coordination beyond the
boundary of the ﬁrm will instantiate an arm’s length market regime (upper
right quadrant). Chandlerian hierarchies are found within individual ﬁrms, but
relationships beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm, including with competitors,
suppliers, distributors, creditors, and employees, are organized through formal
contracts and competitive markets (Hall & Soskice, 2001, pp. 33–36).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                         1209

Crucially, the state not only enforces price competition between equally
matched competitors, but also aggressively polices the exploitation of eco-
nomic power by large corporations. Companies with market power not only
are prevented from establishing barriers to entry, but are sometimes also
required to actively facilitate entry. This ideal-type is best exempliﬁed by the
United States from the 1940’s until the 1970’s, when both horizontal co-
operation and the exclusionary practices of dominant companies were limited
by regulators.

Mapping Trajectories of Change
Opening up the analytic space to disentangle the complex (multi- not uni-
dimensional) evolution of competition rules governing different types of
market coordination allows us to move beyond the current terms of debate in
both the VOC and EU literature. It forces us to think harder about how
different competition regimes affect who exactly is allowed to coordinate with
whom, and to do what, and about how differences in the answers to these
questions drive variation in the trajectories of change in competition law on
both sides of the Atlantic. By distinguishing movement related to horizontal
versus hierarchical coordination we can identify with more precision the
arenas in which American antitrust law continues to enforce arm’s-length
relations, and those where the law permits (or even encourages) hierarchical
coordination. Similarly, we can also better evaluate where EU competition law
and practice have converged with the United States, where they remain
distinct (in degree if not in kind), and where they have diverged in new ways.
   Figure 1 captures in a stylized way the overall trajectory of change in the
rules governing market competition in the European Union and the United
States since the 1970’s.8 On the horizontal dimension, the US has maintained
and even sharpened its traditionally strict policies toward almost all forms of
interﬁrm (horizontal) coordination. Meanwhile, the EU has indeed moved in
the direction of an arm’s length competition model, by developing stricter
rules for both cartels and many other forms of horizontal coordination
(Billows et al., 2021; Buch-Hansen & Wigger, 2010; Philippon, 2019).
Nonetheless, especially compared to the US, EU competition law continues to
allow substantial horizontal nonmarket coordination in certain areas, par-
ticularly for SMEs, workers, and interﬁrm cooperation agreements aimed at
generating productive efﬁciencies – thus retaining signiﬁcant elements that are
historically characteristic of CMEs (Foster & Thelen, 2023).
   On the hierarchical dimension, however, the US and EU have sharply
diverged, as the US has largely abandoned anti-monopoly, vertical restraint,
and non-horizontal merger enforcement and the EU has intensiﬁed en-
forcement in each of these areas, particularly for dominant companies that
control key infrastructures such as online platforms. In the EU, strengthening


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1210                                        Comparative Political Studies 58(6)




Figure 1. Trajectories of Change in Postwar US and EU Competition Regimes.
Source: Authors’ characterization of competition law change, 1970–2020.


enforcement against abuse of dominance has helped protect nonmarket co-
ordination by smaller ﬁrms from the exploitative and exclusionary practices of
larger companies. Meanwhile, the move in the US toward hierarchical for-
bearance has pushed antitrust policy away from an arm’s-length competition
model characterized by extensive anti-dominance and horizontal enforcement
to maintain market contestability, and toward an oligopolistic model where
horizontal coordination continues to be aggressively policed, but large
companies are given wide leeway to structure the marketplace through hi-
erarchical coordination.
   In the next two sections, we analyze how and why the trajectories of change
have proceeded in this way, examining developments in policy and law, as
well as patterns of enforcement in order to draw a connection between
competition rules and the political economy. Our analysis builds on previous
work by economists and legal scholars who have focused closely on changes
to hierarchical rules in the US, alongside that by EU scholars who have
tracked changes to horizontal rules in Europe and the effect on CMEs (e.g.
Billows et al., 2021; Wigger & Nölke, 2007). However, we expand and reﬁne
both streams of analysis by distinguishing changes across both the horizontal
and hierarchical dimensions, and by pointing out how the changes we
document track the divergent trajectories of the American and European


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                          1211

economies discussed above. While space precludes a full empirical test of the
framework, these two case studies serve to illustrate the utility of our
comparative coordination rights framework for better conceptualizing the co-
evolution of regulatory institutions, producer group organization, and market
structures within contemporary capitalist systems.9



Coordination Rights and the Evolution of the American
Political Economy
Historically, the US embraced what in comparative perspective was in fact a
wholly unique approach to competition policy and jurisprudence (or what in
American parlance is called antitrust). In the closing years of the 19th century,
the political economies in both the US and Europe were upended by ﬁnancial
crises and deep economic depressions. Overcapacity across key markets set in
motion vicious cutthroat competition among ﬁrms, provoking considerable
market turmoil and industrial strife. American and European ﬁrms alike
sought to stabilize markets by banding together into arrangements to defend
against destructive competition and to restore industrial peace. European
governments encouraged and often actively reinforced coordination among
ﬁrms within industries, and judicial forbearance toward these forms of co-
operation supported the ﬂourishing of the dense associational landscape of
producer group politics (trade associations, employer organizations, and labor
unions) that we now associate with coordinated capitalism.
    In the United States, by contrast, the passage of the Sherman Act, and the
Supreme Court’s interpretation of that law, created strong prohibitions against
what Paul calls “horizontal” coordination – i.e., coordination among non-
dominant actors beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm, including but not limited
to labor (Paul, 2020, p. 383).10 Large producers turned to alternative strategies
to stabilize markets through corporate consolidation or the use of vertical
restraints to restrict competition from above. These ﬁrms avoided antitrust
prosecution by internalizing coordination functions – merging with their
former rivals and swallowing up smaller competitors. This was the context
that inspired the ‘great merger movement’ in the US at the turn of the century
that resulted in a dramatic increase in industrial concentration and led to
corporate hierarchy and arms-length exchange becoming the dominant modes
of coordination (Lamoreaux, 1988; Sklar, 1988).11 The strong binary between
“pure” competition and corporate hierarchy that the American judiciary
enforced and policed left a deep imprint on the American political economy
(Berk, 1996). It also helped instantiate an oligopolistic competition model,
where many industries were dominated by a small number of ﬁrms and large
corporations had broad economic power to structure the marketplace in their
interests (Chandler & Hikino, 2009; Sklar, 1988).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1212                                        Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

    American competition policy continued to combine strict enforcement
against horizontal combinations with more lenient (“rule of reason”) treatment
of hierarchical coordination through the interwar period.12 But the Great
Depression and the accompanying dramatic increase in industrial concen-
tration inspired a deep rethinking of American competition policy. A series of
government studies assessing the impact of economic concentration on the
economy in the late 1930’s delivered a scathing indictment of the behavior of
the country’s dominant producers, contributing to an abrupt reversal on the
American approach to hierarchical coordination (Peinert, 2023). Allying with
populist Democrats in Congress, President Roosevelt expanded the Depart-
ment of Justice’s (DOJ) Division of Antitrust budget ﬁve-fold, growing its
staff from 58 lawyers to over 300 (Brinkley, 1996, p. 111). The new head of
the Antitrust Division, Thurman Arnold, launched a period of reinvigorated
enforcement, taking on some of the biggest names in American industry,
including Paramount Studios, the Pullman Company, the Big Three car
companies, and major steel and aluminum producers, during what in retro-
spect is now considered the “Golden Age” of American antitrust enforcement.
    During his ﬁve-year tenure, Arnold pursued many major anti-monopoly
cases, several of which resulted in the structural reorganization of dominant
companies.13 At the same time, he intensiﬁed horizontal enforcement,
launching major cases against dairy producers, construction companies, oil
reﬁneries, and newspapers, among other industries. In many of these cases, the
targets were large companies, but in others they were small ﬁrms or labor
unions (Waller, 2004, pp. 600–603). Altogether, Arnold prosecuted more
cases during his short (1938–43) tenure as head of the DOJ’s Antitrust Di-
vision than the previous ﬁfty years of antitrust combined (Waller, 2004,
p. 583). The combination of a strict approach to both hierarchical and hor-
izontal coordination pushed the American antitrust system squarely toward
the top right ‘arm’s length competition model’ in Table 1.
    Following World War II, the arm’s length model was further institution-
alized. The Celler-Kefauver Act in 1950 made it much easier for regulators to
block mergers and acquisitions. From 1955–1969, the government challenged
167 combinations through litigation (R. A. Posner, 1970, p. 407). Although
these enforcement actions did not always prevent aggregate consolidation via
conglomerate mergers, they did slow down and occasionally reverse con-
centration trends within many industries. Careful economic studies from the
period suggest that agency merger rules and litigation deterred or blocked
numerous horizontal and vertical mergers, leading to a decline in the con-
centration rates of many sectors.14
    In addition to placing a new democratic check on mergers, the government
also continued to limit hierarchical coordination beyond the boundaries of the
ﬁrm through the active enforcement of anti-monopoly and vertical restraint
rules. During the 1950’s and 1960’s, the DOJ and FTC successfully


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                         1213

prosecuted dominant companies for monopoly violations in a variety of areas,
from the exclusionary use of intellectual property to localized price cuts
(Kovacic & Shapiro, 2000, pp. 9–12). Many of these prosecutions constrained
the autonomy of the corporate monoliths of the era including Eastman Kodak,
General Electric, Westinghouse, Procter & Gamble, and Bell Laboratories
(Kovaleff, 1980; Watkins, 1961). Sometimes the mere threat of prosecution
was sufﬁcient to force powerful companies to show pricing restraint, as ar-
guably occurred in the petroleum sector in response to ongoing DOJ in-
vestigations of the seven largest oil and gas companies (McFarland & Colgan,
2023). To be sure, regulators also continued to place limits on horizontal
coordination by prosecuting Sherman Act cases against small ﬁrms. However,
to a greater degree than in prior or future eras, the enforcement emphasis was
on large companies.15 Furthermore, courts and regulators largely avoided
using antitrust to limit the coordination rights of workers, at least when
coordination occurred in the context of labor unions. The result was a political
economy that, while retaining many oligopolistic features, was also char-
acterized by contestable markets and countervailing power in most industries
(Galbraith, 1952).



Hierarchical Forbearance and the Move toward Oligopoly
The era, however, was short-lived. Already in the 1960s, American antitrust
policy and practice had come under attack from both the left and right.
Liberals such as Ralph Nader complained of corporate capture, while con-
servatives blasted an overweening bureaucracy. By the late 1960s, economists
and legal scholars attached to the so-called “Chicago School” of law and
economics had become vocally skeptical about the wisdom of the entire
postwar antitrust regime. Robert Bork’s inﬂuential book, The Antitrust
Paradox (published in 1978, but much longer in the works), had steadily
gained inﬂuence in legal circles throughout the late 1960s and 1970s. Federal
courts and regulators began to incrementally adjust existing precedents and
policies in ways that led to more permissive hierarchical coordination rules. In
several key cases at the end of the 1970’s, the Supreme Court reversed its own
precedents by establishing a new ‘consumer welfare’ test as a requirement for
prosecuting hierarchical restrictions (Orbach, 2011). In the aftermath of these
decisions, most of the non-horizontal ‘per se’ rules that had been established
during the post-war period were reversed and replaced with the more per-
missive ‘rule of reason’ (Khan, 2016; Kovacic & Shapiro, 2000). The change
in jurisprudence made it much more difﬁcult for US regulators to enforce
hierarchical coordination rules, leading to a series of government losses in
major merger and anti-monopoly cases (Kovacic & Shapiro, 2000, p. 54).16
These changes gave large ﬁrms more autonomy to impose vertical restraints


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1214                                          Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

on their suppliers and distributors, erect barriers to entry, and pursue mergers
that consolidated their market positions.
    In 1981 Reagan elevated Chicago School thinking to government policy
with his appointments of Borkian acolyte William F. Baxter to head the DOJ’s
Antitrust Division and fellow Chicago schooler James Miller III as FTC chair.
The new appointees presided over a sharp decline in all forms of antitrust
enforcement against dominant market actors, while simultaneously intensi-
fying horizontal enforcement, especially against smaller ﬁrms. Henceforth,
antitrust policy and enforcement would fully embrace the Chicago school
formula; the core criterion against which anti-competitive actions would be
judged was whether they explicitly harmed consumer welfare, deﬁned largely
in terms of price (Khan, 2016). The shift toward a permissive approach to
hierarchical coordination has only intensiﬁed since the early 2000’s, as the
Supreme Court has ruled in favor of hierarchical controls by dominant ﬁrms –
and against antitrust interventions – in almost all of its major cases (Wu,
2018).
    Combined with the empowerment of economists relative to lawyers within
US regulatory agencies, these court-led changes in coordination rights have
contributed to a systematic collapse in anti-monopoly and hierarchical re-
straint enforcement (Berman, 2022; Ergen & Kohl, 2019). Figure 2 reports the
pattern of DOJ enforcement before and after the adoption of the consumer
welfare standard by courts in 1979. It shows that monopoly, vertical restraints,
and non-horizontal merger cases made up only 2% of enforcement actions in
the 1980’s and 1990’s, representing a dramatic decrease from the 1960’s and
1970’s when such actions represented one in ﬁve DOJ prosecutions. A similar
pattern can be seen in merger enforcement. While in the 1960’s and 1970’s, the




Figure 2. DOJ enforcement before and after the adoption of ‘Chicago School’ ideas.
Source: Gallo et al. 2000. Calculations by authors. Checkered (blue) areas indicate
enforcement actions limiting hierarchical coordination; striped pattern (red) areas
indicate enforcement actions limiting horizontal coordination.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                       1215

DOJ blocked a steady mix of horizontal and vertical measures, after 1980,
merger challenges signiﬁcantly declined. As can be seen in Figure 2, hori-
zontal merger challenges became rarer after 1980, shifting from a quarter of
total cases to just 8%. Meanwhile, non-horizontal merger enforcement almost
entirely disappeared.
    In response to this carte blanche, corporate America pursued an un-
precedented merger boom. According to one study, the number and value of
mergers and acquisitions dramatically increased in the years following the
adoption of new merger guidelines in 1984 (Pryor, 2001). From 1985–2000,
the annual volume of mergers and acquisitions tripled, with three-quarters of
combinations occurring between ﬁrms operating in the same industry (Ibid,
pp. 305–308). Over the same period, the average degree of industrial con-
centration in individual industries signiﬁcantly increased—the reverse of the
trend observed from 1960–1980, when hierarchical coordination rights were
more restricted by US antitrust law (Ibid).
    Even as U.S. regulators largely abandoned anti-monopoly and merger
enforcement, they intensiﬁed enforcement of cartels and other forms of
horizontal coordination, successfully prosecuting hundreds of cases (Gallo
et al., 2000; Kovacic, 2003, pp. 415–420). Unlike the Golden Era of antitrust
when large corporations were the main focus, the vast majority of these
prosecutions were against small and medium-sized companies.17 Within many
industries, these prosecutions undermined the ability of domestic ﬁrms to
effectively compete against foreign ﬁrms in Japan and Europe that enjoyed
extensive horizontal coordination rights (Arslan, 2023). Workers and inde-
pendent contractors seeking to pool their bargaining power were also more
frequently targeted; these included, among others, groups of low-paid at-
torneys, piano teachers, ice skating instructors and church organists (Paul,
2020, pp. 391–392). Regulators not only prosecuted smaller ﬁrms, inde-
pendent contractors and workers more frequently, but they did so with
criminal sanctions. From 1980–1997, horizontal criminal cases constituted
85% of DOJ enforcement actions, compared to just 36% prior to 1980.
    In the United States, the combination of weak enforcement against hier-
archical coordination by dominant ﬁrms and intensiﬁed prosecution of
horizontal collusion by smaller ﬁrms has allowed the US to drift toward the
oligopolistic competition model in the bottom right quadrant of Figure 1.
Scholars have identiﬁed clear links between speciﬁc changes to antitrust rules
regulating mergers, hierarchical restraints, and independent contractors and
the decline of worker power and increase in labor market rigidity described
earlier (Azar et al., 2022; Callaci, 2021a, 2021b; Haﬁz, 2022; Naidu et al.,
2018). A growing number of economic studies have also provided evidence
that the decline in anti-monopoly enforcement likely contributed to the trend
toward oligopoly (Gutiérrez & Philippon, 2017, 2018) and that the largest
American ﬁrms have supported this shift through the political process


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1216                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

(Lancieri et al., 2022). Indeed, a competition regime that combines strict rules
on horizontal coordination with permissive rules on hierarchical control
beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm allows dominant ﬁrms to effectively have
their cake and eat it too. On the one hand, they are provided signiﬁcant
autonomy to structure the marketplace in their own interests, through ex-
tensive vertical contracting and exclusionary behavior. At the same, they are
largely free from horizontally organized forms of countervailing power such
as organized SMEs or workers that might limit this autonomy or provide a
signiﬁcant competitive challenge. Put differently, the largest ﬁrms in the
United States are able to exploit the asymmetry in who has coordination rights
in ways that lead to the predominance of hierarchical over horizontal forms of
coordination (Paul, 2020).

Coordination Rights and the Evolution of the European
Political Economy
In the formative period of industrial capitalism, many European industries
were highly organized through cartels and other forms of business associa-
tions that relied heavily on both horizontal and hierarchical coordination
beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm. This placed European market structures in
many countries clearly in the cartelistic competition model found in the
bottom left of Table 1. Virtually all western and northern European countries –
including not only Germany but also Austria, Belgium, Finland, the Neth-
erlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Spain, Italy, and even the United
Kingdom – took a much more permissive stance toward horizontal coordi-
nation than the United States (Schröter, 1996). Well into the postwar period,
cartel organizations remained a prominent feature of many capitalist econ-
omies on the continent (Gerber, 1998; Shanahan & Fellman, 2022).
   The creation of a supranational European competition law through the
Treaties of Paris and Rome presented a direct challenge to the cartelistic
competition model. American ofﬁcials were heavily involved in designing the
competition provisions of the European Coal and Steel Community and the
U.S. experience with the Sherman Act provided a primary reference point for
legal developments within the European Economic Community (EEC). The
prohibition against anti-competitive agreements, enshrined in the Treaty of
Rome, would have a lasting effect on the European economy, contributing to
the decartelization of European industry and instantiating a more ‘arm’s
length’ competition model within many sectors (Djelic, 2001; Harding &
Joshua, 2010).
   Yet across all six of the founding EEC countries, trade associations and
labor unions had also expressed hesitation toward (in many cases outright
opposition to) the establishment of a ‘Sherman Act’ in Europe, which they
saw as undermining their ability to pursue the cooperative arrangements and


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                          1217

long-term investments needed to rebuild the economy (Buch-Hansen &
Wigger, 2011; Gillingham, 2004; Milward, 1984). The supranational Euro-
pean system established under the Treaties of Paris and Rome accommodated
these concerns. The enactment of substantive rules that prohibited cartels
while providing broad exemptions for ‘beneﬁcial’ horizontal agreements
reﬂected a compromise between “cross-national liberal modernizers” sup-
portive of the American cartel prohibition model and European business
associations and unions, which saw horizontal cooperation as essential for
rationalization, standardization, and specialization in European industry
(Djelic, 2001, pp. 232–235).
    So, while US inﬂuence clearly made a mark on Europe’s postwar com-
petition regime, Europe would never go so far as the US in prohibiting all
forms of horizontal non-market coordination through rules that could be
enforced by both private and public parties in the courts.18 Indeed, EU
competition law preserved a signiﬁcant space for coordination beyond the
boundaries of the ﬁrm. Thus, for example, the Treaty of Rome’s prohibition of
restrictive practices included a broad exception for any agreement “which
contributes to improving the production or distribution of goods or to pro-
moting technical or economic progress” and did not run afoul of other general
principles (Article 101[85]). One of the early laws enacted by the new EEC
was Regulation 17/1962, which provided the Commission with the authority
to permit restrictive agreements that fell within certain categories. A few years
later, this power was expanded to include block exemptions, providing the
Commission with a quasi-legislative role to determine what kinds of
agreements were acceptable or unacceptable in the economy (Gerber, 1998,
p. 351).
    Over time, and in ongoing consultation with industry, these exemptions
came to include a wide range of horizontal inter-ﬁrm collaborations and joint
ventures seen as economically beneﬁcial. This included cooperation in
research and development and standard setting, joint licensing, and restrictive
selling and purchasing contracts that involved two companies in different
countries (Hawk, 1972). The Commission also encouraged coordination and
technology transfer between small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) by
exempting companies with a level of economic activity below a certain
threshold, covering an estimated 90% of all companies (Buch-Hansen &
Wigger, 2011, p. 67). Indeed, the EEC competition authority actively sought
to promote cooperation between SMEs as a way to allow them to more
effectively compete against larger companies. By 1980, several
thousand cooperation agreements between SMEs had been approved by the
Commission (European Commission, 1980, p. 16). In the face of economic
shocks or industrial difﬁculties, the EEC competition directorate even per-
mitted the establishment of ‘crisis cartels’ designed to address excess capacity
in an orderly manner (Fiebig, 1999).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1218                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

    At the same time, the EU also gradually strengthened hierarchical coor-
dination rules that placed limits on the power of large companies to eco-
nomically coerce less powerful ones: whether through trade associations,
restrictive agreements, unilateral practices, or mergers (Büthe, 2007). In its
ﬁrst abuse of dominance investigation under Article 86 of the Treaty of Rome,
which involved the American Continental Can Company, at the time the
world’s largest producer of metal cans, the Commission charged the company
with distorting the competitive process by creating barriers to entry and
restricting the liberty of its smaller European distributors. In developing the
case, the Commission drew directly from the ‘ordoliberal’ school of com-
petition that had crystallized in Germany in the post war period and which
called for a strong regulatory framework that limited the exploitation of
private economic power (Gerber, 1994). The CJEU upheld the Commission’s
decision, establishing the precedent that abuse of dominance covered not only
exclusionary practices that directly harmed consumers but also those that
caused indirect harm through “their impact on an effective competition
structure” (Schweitzer, 2008). Subsequent cases and jurisprudence reinforced
the ordoliberal paradigm, establishing a ‘special obligation’ on large com-
panies not to exploit their economic power, and prohibiting a range of ‘unfair’
methods of competition. From 1971–1992, the Commission ﬁnalized
25 abuse of dominance decisions, with many decisions involving large
penalties and behavioral remedies (Carree et al., 2010, p. 110).
    The combination of moderate rules for horizontal coordination with in-
creasingly strict rules on hierarchical coordination placed the EU framework
squarely in the “cooperative competition model” found in the top left box of
our typology. Signiﬁcant exemptions for horizontal coordination created
important space for ﬁrms to continue to pursue a range of cooperative
strategies that allowed them to more effectively compete against bigger ﬁrms.
As long as ﬁrms, workers and the associations that represented them did not
clearly discriminate against economic actors located in other EEC member
states or violate a limited number of hard-core prohibitions, they rarely faced a
challenge from the Commission. Indeed, many forms of coordination were
explicitly endorsed by the Commission, especially if they were seen as in-
creasing economic productivity, encouraging economic cooperation across
member states or facilitating industrial transformation. This legal structure
facilitated long-term relationships and specialization in high value-added
products long seen as at the core of CMEs (Wigger & Nölke, 2007, p. 490).
    At the same time, the EEC’s abuse of dominance rules placed some
constraints on dominant companies’ ability to exert economic power over
other ﬁrms. While abuse of dominance enforcement remained modest during
this period, it did contribute to an emerging legal framework aimed at
constraining economic coercion by more powerful ﬁrms. By providing
smaller companies with some protection from exploitative practices, EU


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                          1219

competition law may have therefore helped to “stabilize ownership and
control structures” in ways that reduced pressures for ‘hostile takeovers’ as
well as other means of ﬁrm consolidation (Wigger & Nölke, 2007, p. 490).
Thus, at least indirectly, the EU’s restrictions on hierarchical coordination
helped sustain horizontal and coordinative non-market relations.

Liberalization and the Intensiﬁcation of Hierarchical Enforcement
During the 1980’s and 1990’s, the European Community underwent major
institutional and policy reforms that profoundly shaped the European coor-
dination rights regime. As part of the broader economic liberalization program
pursued under the Single European Act, the competition directorate initiated a
number of high-proﬁle enforcement actions against state-owned companies in
the telecommunications, energy, and transportation sectors—sectors that
previously had not been subject to a strict competition principle (Buch-Hansen
& Wigger, 2010; Quack & Djelic, 2005). At the same time, the Commission
received new authority to approve transnational mergers, providing a channel
to facilitate corporate consolidation (and hierarchical coordination rights) over
member state objections (Billows et al., 2021; Thatcher, 2014). Finally, the
European Commission adopted institutional reforms that expanded the role of
economic analysis in competition decisions – a move seen by many observers
as aligning EU practices more closely with the consumer welfare standard in
the United States (Bartalevich, 2016; Wigger & Nölke, 2007).
    But what is equally striking (albeit less commented upon) is the extent to
which policymakers also maintained and even reinforced core aspects of
earlier arrangements conducive to CMEs. On the horizontal dimension, rules
that facilitate and protect long-standing non-market forms of coordination
were never directly supplanted and sometimes even expanded. On the hi-
erarchical dimension, the EU not only continues to place limits on exclu-
sionary practices by dominant companies, but actually has intensiﬁed
enforcement. Even EU merger policy – which we agree bears some re-
semblance to the contemporary U.S. approach – is still comparatively stricter
when it comes to dominant companies. Thus, even as the Commission ar-
ticulated a “competition only vision” (Buch-Hansen & Wigger, 2010, p. 35) it
maintained a number of policies and practices that are complementary to
horizontal nonmarket coordination. As illustrated in Figure 1, elements of
continuity – and continued divergence from the US – can be seen in the
resilience of horizontal exemptions, while new elements of divergence can be
seen in the EU approach to vertical restraints, abuse of dominance and
mergers.
    Examining ﬁrst the horizontal dimension of coordination, we can see a
mixed pattern of continuity and change. On the one hand, the Commission,
along with national regulators, has tightened horizontal cartel rules and


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1220                                         Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

increased enforcement (Harding & Joshua, 2010; Ordóñez-De-Haro et al.,
2018). On the other hand, regulators have continued to provide signiﬁcant
exemptions for horizontal cooperation in areas such as research and devel-
opment, specialization, joint production and distribution, information sharing,
standard setting, and collective labor agreements that it deems to be eco-
nomically or socially beneﬁcial. In its 2010 and 2022 reviews of the two
Horizontal Block Exemption Agreements and the Horizontal Guidelines for
Cooperation, the Commission repeatedly afﬁrmed that horizontal cooperation
between competitors is a necessary and important aspect of the European
economy.19 Furthermore, and contrary to predications of convergence the-
ories, these block exemptions have if anything been widened not narrowed.
Over the past three decades, the European Commission has gradually in-
creased the market share threshold for many types of horizontal agreements,
allowing more companies to fall under existing exemptions, while also de-
veloping new exemptions for cooperation in areas such as sustainability and
digital markets.20 Recent business surveys indicate that substantial portions of
industry continue to use these exemptions to cooperate in key areas, especially
for commercialization and purchasing, information exchange, specialization,
and research and development (European Commission, 2021).
   In the labor arena, the Commission also continues a broader European
tradition of overall greater support. Not only does EU law explicitly include
exemptions for both collective bargaining between workers and employers,
and inter-ﬁrm collective bargaining agreements across sectors (Monti, 2021),
but courts and regulators have extended protections to some types of inde-
pendent contractors. In 2014, the ECJ extended established protections to
cover agreements with workers who are formally self-employed but in fact
dependent on a shared employer (so-called “false [or “fake”] self-employed”)
(Ankersmit, 2015; Šmejkal, 2015). Following on these decisions, the
Commission adopted new Guidelines that further clarify that European
competition rules regulating horizontal coordination do not apply to inde-
pendent contractors who seek to organize as long as they are “in a situation
comparable to workers” and are in a “weak negotiating position” (European
Commission, 2022).
   When we turn to the second dimension of competition policy—hierarchical
coordination beyond the bounds of the ﬁrm—a different picture emerges, one
that points toward divergence and movement away from the (post-1980’s)
American model. In the United States, contractual restraints imposed by
dominant players on their suppliers, distributors, and franchisees have become
increasingly important in the context of corporate strategies of ﬁssurization,
for as Callaci (2021a) and others have pointed out, contracting outside the ﬁrm
is most attractive if you can impose constraints on other ﬁrms while si-
multaneously escaping responsibilities such as labor. The EU has partially
resisted this trend. In addition to barring hard-core restrictions such as resale


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                              1221

price maintenance and territorial restrictions in nearly all instances, EU
competition law places signiﬁcant limitations on certain franchising ar-
rangements, parity requirements and non-compete clauses involving domi-
nant ﬁrms (Nagy, 2016). Recent revisions to the Vertical Block Exemption
Regulation (VBER) suggest that the EU is moving toward more restrictive
rules for exclusionary agreements in some areas, particularly when one party
to the agreement possesses market power.21
    In practice, the EU continues to vigorously enforce rules on vertical re-
straints when they involve dominant companies. Figure 3 reports the per-
centage of total infringement decisions between 2005–2022, after the
modernization of competition law, compared to 1964–2004. We can see that
vertical restraints enforcement, while slightly declining as a percentage of total
enforcement actions, remains robust. In addition to Commission enforcement,
national competition authorities also now actively enforce EU vertical re-
straint rules. From 2010–2019, national regulators completed 391 investiga-
tions involving vertical agreements, 257 of which resulted in a judgment
(European Commission, 2020, pp. 46–48). A majority of these cases related to
resale price maintenance agreements, while a signiﬁcant number of inves-
tigations also dealt with exclusive or selective distribution, parity clauses that
restricted price setting, or franchising/single branding agreements.
    In addition to maintaining a stricter approach to vertical restraints, the EU has
also strengthened abuse of dominance enforcement, which applies only to ﬁrms
with substantial market shares. Even as the EU has hired economists and pursued
a more “effects-based approach,” it has continued to employ an ordoliberal-
inspired competition paradigm that places a ‘special responsibility’ on dominant




Figure 3. European commission enforcement before and after competition law
modernization. Source: Carree et al. 2010 and European Commission. Calculations
by the authors. Checkered (blue) areas indicate enforcement actions limiting
hierarchical coordination; striped (red) areas indicate enforcement actions limiting
horizontal coordination.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1222                                          Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

companies not to abuse their power (Foster, 2022). This includes extensive rules,
adopted into both hard and soft law, that prohibit dominant companies from
engaging in a range of ‘abusive’ practices, including predatory pricing, margin
squeezes, exclusive dealing, exclusive purchasing, exclusionary discounts, tying,
refusals to deal, discrimination, and exploitative abuses. It also includes obli-
gations for dominant companies to facilitate access to essential facilities, to
provide interoperability information, and to license intellectual property.
    Indeed, if anything, EU abuse of dominance rules have become stricter –
and more intensely enforced – since the 1990’s. As can be seen in Figure 4, the
European Commission’s emphasis on abuse of dominance enforcement has
signiﬁcantly increased during the 21st century. Since the year 2000, the
European Commission has ﬁnalized more than 70 infringement and com-
mitment decisions under this article across a wide range of industries. These
decisions have generated more than EUR13 B in ﬁnes and mandated sweeping
behavioral changes to some of the world’s most powerful companies. As can
be seen in Figure 4, the number of annual cases ﬁnalized since 2004 is nearly
twice as high as the number ﬁnalized in the earlier period. In addition to cases
pursued by the Commission, national regulators have also ramped up en-
forcement against abuse of dominance. Since receiving the power (in 2004) to
independently enforce EU rules in this area, national competition authorities
have ﬁnalized more than 500 abuse of dominance decisions—or one third of
all decisions— touching on many of the same concerns.22
    Most of these cases have sought to address power inequalities between
larger and smaller ﬁrms. Of the 39 Commission abuse of dominance decisions
ﬁnalized between 2009–2019, nearly half involved facilitating access for a
competitor to an ‘essential facility,’ resource, or other infrastructure controlled
by a dominant player; 21% involved stopping a dominant company from
leveraging its power in one market over another one in a way that limited
opportunities for competitors to compete; and 15% involved preventing




Figure 4. Abuse of dominance enforcement by the European Commission, 1970–
2022. Source: European Commission reports.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                          1223

predatory behavior that was seen as foreclosing the competitive process
(Foster, 2022). Perhaps most notably, the European Commission has pursued
major cases against dominant online platform companies such as Microsoft,
Google, Amazon, Apple and Meta (Facebook), which required them not only
to pay large ﬁnes in some cases but also to make major changes to their
business models.
    While these previous interventions were post hoc, stemming from in-
vestigations initiated long after violations have occurred and usually taking
years to investigate and ﬁnalize, the new European Digital Markets Act
(DMA) is more proactive and places even stricter rules on hierarchical co-
ordination. This legislation designates a number of large online platforms as
‘gatekeeper’ ﬁrms and then subjects these ﬁrms to stringent requirements
designed to ensure market fairness and contestability. Since it establishes hard,
ex ante rules, many observers are hailing it as the world’s most sweeping
platform economy regulation (Boyer, 2022; Ciofﬁ et al., 2022; Larouche & de
Streel, 2021). For instance, the DMA will obligate large platform companies to
apply fair and non-discriminatory conditions to the ranking of services and
products and allow business users to receive the data that they generate on the
platform and to be able to conclude contracts outside of the platform.
    The more proactive approach to economic dominance can also be seen in
the merger arena. Empirical studies have shown that the vast majority of
mergers are approved, and that this approach has contributed not only to
increased economic consolidation but also to more liberalized and ﬁnan-
cialized corporate structures (Billows et al., 2021; Koltay et al., 2023). But if
the EU has often facilitated hierarchical coordination by approving trans-
national mergers (Thatcher, 2014), these rights have been more conditional
and limited than in the United States. Legal scholars have long noted that the
EU takes a tougher line on vertical and conglomerate mergers, as evidenced in
several high proﬁle transatlantic disputes (Gifford & Kudrle, 2015, pp. 57–
62). Recent empirical studies demonstrate that this tougher line is systematic:
the EU has at least a 30% higher merger challenge rate in proposed mergers
involving dominant ﬁrms when ﬁrm characteristics are equalized (Bergman
et al., 2019). In recent years, EU merger decisions have prevented the creation
of European champions (Nourry & Rabinowitz, 2020) and limited the
consolidation of tech companies whose business models depend on the ac-
quisition of current and potential competitors.23
    The combination of stricter enforcement against hierarchical coordination
by dominant ﬁrms with a comparatively permissive approach to horizontal
coordination by smaller ﬁrms has pushed EU policy toward the border be-
tween the cooperative and arm’s length competition models found in Figure 1.
On the one hand, European competition law has clearly contributed to the
decartelization of industry and the instantiation of price competition in
product markets and formerly regulated sectors. It has also facilitated


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1224                                          Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

transnational corporate consolidation through its merger policy. On the other
hand, these changes have been partially moderated by the maintenance of
exemptions for signiﬁcant nonmarket coordination by smaller players and the
intensiﬁcation of hierarchical coordination rules beyond the boundaries of the
ﬁrm. The EU’s comparatively permissive approach to horizontal coordination
has directly contributed to the durability of employer associations and labor
unions that have long been central to nonmarket coordination. At the same
time, restrictive hierarchical rules have provided some protection for non-
market coordination by ﬁrms in the face of signiﬁcant liberalization pressures.

Conclusion
Competition law is a ‘constitutive’ institution in capitalism, helping determine
where coordination is allowed and where competition is required. In this article,
we have built on Paul’s framework to highlight some of the important ways that
competition regimes in Europe and the United States enable and protect dif-
ferent forms of economic coordination, with signiﬁcant implications for cap-
italist market structures. In the US, a competition regime that now combines its
traditionally strict rules on horizontal cooperation with a permissive approach to
hierarchical coordination has produced a distinct drift away from the arm’s
length contracting associated with LMEs, and fostered the development of
oligopolistic markets in many sectors. In the EU, by contrast, a competition
regime that continues to feature relatively more permissive horizontal rules for
SMEs but combines this now with increasingly strict rules regarding abuse of
dominance and vertical restraints has continued to support some of the co-
ordinated market structures traditionally associated with CMEs.
    Our study helps identify and explain important changes in the political
economy of advanced capitalist countries that have so far ﬂown under the
radar of CPE scholars. Among other contributions, we have complicated the
narrative that the EU mostly acts as a ‘neoliberal’ force that undermines
coordinated market economies. Although European competition law has
certainly bolstered economic liberalization in certain respects, in other ways it
has helped to preserve longstanding forms of nonmarket coordination. Ex-
amining the extensive exemptions established in EU hard and soft law, we
have shown that the law permits and encourages forms of interﬁrm horizontal
coordination in areas such as research and development, licensing, special-
ization and labor relations that have long been at the heart of CME com-
parative advantage. Moreover, we have shown that EU hierarchical rules –
which have increasingly emphasized abuse of dominance enforcement since
the 1980’s – provide protection for nonmarket coordination, particularly when
smaller ﬁrms are involved. By directing horizontal coordination away from
the predatory and rent-seeking practices associated with cartels, and toward
competition-enhancing activities such as innovation, standard-setting,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                           1225

technology transfer, research collaboration, and more relatively coordinated
labor relations, EU competition rules may have even played an important role
in shoring up coordinated market economies in the face of many challenges
and convergence pressures.
   Our study also has implications for the emerging ﬁeld of American political
economy (Hacker et al., 2022). The CPE literature has traditionally focused
heavily on Europe and on CMEs, and sometimes operated with a static and
somewhat stylized model of the American political economy. Within the
“varieties of capitalism” literature, the US served as the paradigmatic case of a
liberal market economy based on arm’s-length contracting and highly ﬂexible
markets (Hall & Soskice, 2001). Yet as we have shown, the US has been
moving away from this ideal type for some time. For VOC’s critics, by
contrast, the US has been seen as the end point of a universal trajectory of
capitalist development toward which Europe is catastrophically careening
(Streeck, 2009). Our analysis challenges such deterministic models as well, by
delving more deeply into the speciﬁc historical cycles and political forces –
including, centrally, competition law and antitrust – that have shaped and
reshaped both American and European capitalism over time.
   More broadly, our study points to the value of bringing competition law
into comparative capitalism scholarship. Although many scholars recognize
that competition rules must matter, few studies have sought to ﬂesh out the
concrete relationship between competition rules, coordination rights, and
capitalist organization. This has led competition law to be addressed only
ﬂeetingly, if at all, in the varieties of capitalism literature. As we have sought
to demonstrate, bringing competition law into the analysis of comparative
capitalisms can shed new light on both the origins of distinct systems and on
the contemporary changes many of them are undergoing. By providing a
tractable way to distinguish between changes in the coordination rights of
competing ﬁrms and workers from changes in the rules regulating the hi-
erarchical exploitation of economic power from above, a comparative co-
ordination rights framework clariﬁes both differences in the rules across
systems as well as the trajectory of institutional evolution over time. Our
dynamic, multi-dimensional framework provides a way to maintain the an-
alytically useful premise that capitalism comes in distinct varieties while also
recognizing that these varieties continuously evolve in response to historically
contingent economic and political pressures (Deeg & Jackson, 2007; Hay,
2020).
   As we have sought to show in this article, competition regimes funda-
mentally structure the relationships between producer groups in capitalist
systems, with important implications for market structures and for the bar-
gaining power between competing ﬁrms, suppliers and distributors, em-
ployers and employees, and workers across different ﬁrms. Consequently,
competition law should be studied by political scientists as a site of political


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1226                                             Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

contestation that shapes the organization of capitalist systems. We hope this
combination of theoretical innovation and empirical demonstration will
stimulate further research into competition law and varieties of capitalism that
more fully elaborates this complex relationship.

Acknowledgments
We thank Melike Arslan, Tim Büthe, Cindy Cheng, Eugenı́a da Conceição-Heldt, Peter
Hall, Catherine Hoefﬂer, Sebastian Kohl, Matthias Matthijs, Frédéric Mérand, Eric
Peinert, Tobias Rommel and three anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on an
earlier version. We thank Serene Archer and John Bradley for research assistance. The
authors also gratefully acknowledge the institutional support of the Munich School of
Politics and Public Policy at the Technical University of Munich.

Declaration of Conﬂicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iDs
Chase Foster  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6364-1305
Kathleen Thelen  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4102-8504

Data Availability Statement
More information about data supporting the ﬁndings of this study is available in the
online appendix.

Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.

Notes
 1. Important exceptions include Peinert (2023), Guardiancich and Guidi (2016),
    Billows et al. (2021) and Thatcher (2014).
 2. The role of the law in structuring capitalist markets has been explored by a diverse
    group of scholars in law, economics, and economic sociology. See especially
    Beckert (2009); Christophers (2016); Deakin et al. (2017); Paul (2020); Pistor
    (2019); La Porta et al. (1998).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                                1227

 3. Tavernise, Sabrina. Frozen in Place: Americans are moving at the lowest rate on
    record. Nov. 20, 2019. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/20/us/
    american-workers-moving-states-.html.
 4. For instance, in a review of economic developments in the eurozone,
    the European Central Bank found that concentration ratios were “broadly
    ﬂat,” markups were “fairly stable”, and that economic dynamism
    was characterized by “no obviously secular change.” See Cavalleri et al.
    (2019).
 5. Gooberman and Hauptmeier (2022) note that in European CMEs, employer or-
    ganizations “retained their role within collective bargaining despite some erosion”
    as well as in “corporatist structures governing training regimes and social pro-
    grammes” (28).
 6. In line with the VOC literature, our focus is on economic coordination by ﬁrms and
    workers. Industrial policy and other forms of direct state economic coordination
    are therefore beyond the scope of our analysis.
 7. Note that we are using the terms ‘hierarchical’ and ‘horizontal’ to refer to dif-
    ferences in economic power. This is different from, although related to, the
    common distinction in antitrust law between “horizontal” agreements or practices
    involving direct competitors and “vertical” agreements or practices between actors
    at different stages in the production and distribution process. Thus, in antitrust
    law’s usage, the term “horizontal” also captures agreements between dominant
    actors, whereas our use of the term applies only to agreements among non-
    dominant actors.
 8. Our schematic diagram is based on a combination of qualitative assessment of
    rules (elaborated at length below) and a quantitative assessment of enforcement.
    More details are available in the online Appendix.
 9. In the online appendix, we provide additional evidence that CMEs and LMEs have
    enacted systematically different competition rules, which are correlated with
    objective measures of nonmarket coordination.
10. Sklar (1988), Roy (1999), and Paul (2021) all emphasize that common law itself
    was not entirely hostile toward combinations among ﬁrms, and indeed Roy
    documents the existence of many such arrangements in the United States before
    the Sherman Act.
11. As Sanders (1986, p. 159) points out, in 1899 alone over 1000 companies had
    disappeared in mergers, and just a few years later over 100 industrial ﬁelds were
    dominated by a single ﬁrm.
12. For a discussion of important but ultimately unsustainable efforts to develop a
    more cooperative competition model in the 1920’s see Berk (2009); Hawley
    (1976); Phillips Sawyer (2018).
13. For instance, the Pullman Company was required to divorce the manufacture of
    sleeping cars from the provision of sleeping car services. In another judgment,
    Paramount was ordered to move out of the exhibition part of the ﬁlm industry
    (Hawley, 1966, p. 451).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1228                                             Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

14. In a study of industrial concentration trends from 1947–1963, Mueller (1967)
    provides evidence that merger enforcement likely reduced concentration in the
    dairy, shoe manufacturing, cement, and steel industries. He concludes that “an-
    timerger policy has created an environment preventing increases in concentration
    in some industries and encouraging decreases in concentration in others.” See
    especially pp. 14–34.
15. From 1955–1970, nearly half (47%) of DOJ antitrust prosecutions were against
    Fortune 500 companies (Gallo et al. (2000, p. 78).
16. In 1974, the U.S. government suffered its ﬁrst ever merger defeat. Over the
    following decade, courts blocked or regulators abandoned major anti-monopoly
    cases against IBM, Exxon Mobile, Xerox, Good Year Tires, food manufacturers,
    and chemical companies (Kovacic & Shapiro, 2000, p. 54).
17. The proportion of cases against non-Fortune 500 companies increased from
    around half in the 1960’s and 1970’s to 95% in the 1980’s (Gallo et al. (2000,
    p. 78).
18. A similar set of compromises were necessary to enact Germany’s ﬁrst postwar
    competition law. The 1957 Act Against Restraints of Competition was held up for
    nearly a decade, and only enacted after the inclusion of broad economic coor-
    dination rights, a key demand of the Federation of Germany Industries (BDI). For a
    full history see Djelic (2001); Quack and Djelic (2005).
19. The reviews and accompanying expert reports and documents are available at
    https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/public-consultations/2019-hbers_en.
20. See (Commission Regulation (EU) 1066/2023, 2023, Commission Regulation
    (EU) 2023/1067, 2023, European Commission, 2023).
21. The revised 2022 Vertical Block Exemption Regulation broadens the deﬁ-
    nition of market power and imposes stricter rules on online intermediaries. See
    https://www.whitecase.com/insight-alert/new-eu-competition-rules-distribution-
    agreements.
22. Between 2004–2021, national competition authorities ﬁnalized 505 decisions
    based exclusively or partially on Article 102 of the European Treaties (formerly
    Article 86). This represented 34% of the 1478 decisions ﬁnalized during this
    period. Calculations made using ECN (2023).
23. In 2021, the European Commission published a new guidance on merger referrals
    that signiﬁcantly expanded its capacity to scrutinize Big Tech acquisitions. Recent
    EU merger investigations or decisions have blocked Booking.com’s proposed
    acquisition of a travel company, Adobe’s proposed merger with Figma, and
    Apple’s purchase of iRobot. See Killick (2021).


References
Ankersmit, L. (2015). Albany revisited: The court directs NCA to carry a more social
    tune. https://europeanlawblog.eu/2015/03/03/albany-revisited-the-court-directs-
    nca-to-carry-a-more-social-tune/


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                                  1229

Ansell, B., & Cansunar, A. (2021). The political consequences of housing (un) af-
     fordability. Journal of European Social Policy, 31(5), 597–613. https://doi.org/
     10.1177/09589287211056171
Arslan, M. (2023). Legal diffusion as protectionism: The case of the US promotion of
     antitrust laws. Review of International Political Economy, 30(6), 2285–2308.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2022.2158118
Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., & Van Reenen, J. (2020). The fall of the
     labor share and the rise of superstar ﬁrms. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     135(2), 645–709. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjaa004
Azar, J., Marinescu, I., & Steinbaum, M. (2022). Labor market concentration. Journal
     of Human Resources, 57(S), S167–S199. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.monopsony.
     1218-9914r1
Bajgar, M., Berlingieri, G., Calligaris, S., Criscuolo, C., & Timmis, J. (2023). Industry
     concentration in Europe and North America. Industrial and Corporate Change,
     1–18. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtac059
Barkai, S. (2020). Declining labor and capital shares. The Journal of Finance, 75(5),
     2421–2463. https://doi.org/10.1111/joﬁ.12909
Bartalevich, D. (2016). The inﬂuence of the Chicago School on the Commission’s
     guidelines, notices and block exemption regulations in EU competition policy.
     JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies, 54(2), 267–283. https://doi.org/10.
     1111/jcms.12292
Beckert, J. (2009). The social order of markets. Theory and Society, 38(3), 245–269.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-008-9082-0
Bergman, M. A., Coate, M. B., Mai, A. T., & Ulrick, S. W. (2019). Does merger policy
     converge after the 2004 European Union reform? Journal of Competition Law
     and Economics, 15(1), 664–689. https://doi.org/10.1093/joclec/nhz007
Berk, G. (1996). Communities of competitors: Open price associations and the
     American state, 1911–1929. Social Science History, 20(3), 375–400. https://doi.
     org/10.1017/s014555320001871x
Berk, G. (2009). Louis D. Brandeis and the making of regulated competition, 1900-
     1932. Cambridge University Press.
Berman, E. P. (2022). Thinking like an economist. Princeton University Press.
Billows, S., Kohl, S., & Tarissan, F. (2021). Bureaucrats or ideologues? EU merger
     control as market-centred integration. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies,
     59(4), 762–781. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcms.13130
Boyer, R. (2022). Platform capitalism: A socio-economic analysis. Socio-Economic
     Review, 20(4), 1857–1879. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwaa055
Brandl, B., & Lehr, A. (2019). The strange non-death of employer and business
     associations: An analysis of their representativeness and activities in Western
     European countries. Economic and Industrial Democracy, 40(4), 932–953.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0143831x16669842
Brinkley, A. (1996). The end of reform: New Deal liberalism in recession and war.
     Vintage.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1230                                              Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

Buch-Hansen, H., & Wigger, A. (2010). Revisiting 50 years of market-making: The
     neoliberal transformation of European competition policy. Review of Interna-
     tional Political Economy, 17(1), 20–44. https://doi.org/10.1080/
     09692290903014927
Buch-Hansen, H., & Wigger, A. (2011). The Politics of European Competition
     Regulation: A Critical Political Economy Perspective. Routledge.
Büthe, T. (2007). The politics of competition and institutional change in European
     union: The ﬁrst ﬁfty years. In S. Meunier, & K. R. McNamara (Eds.), Making
     history: European integration and institutional change at ﬁfty (pp. 175–193).
     Oxford University Press.
Callaci, B. (2021a). Control without responsibility: The legal creation of franchising,
     1960–1980. Enterprise and Society, 22(1), 156–182. https://doi.org/10.1017/eso.
     2019.58
Callaci, B. (2021b). What do franchisees do? Vertical restraints as workplace ﬁssuring
     and labor discipline devices. Journal of Law and Political Economy, 1(3),
     397–444. https://doi.org/10.5070/lp61353764
Carree, M., Günster, A., & Schinkel, M. P. (2010). European antitrust policy 1957–
     2004: An analysis of Commission decisions. Review of Industrial Organization,
     36(2), 97–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11151-010-9237-9
Casper, S. (2001). The legal framework for corporate governance: The inﬂuence of
     contract law on company strategies in Germany and the United States. In P. A.
     Hall, & D. Soskice (Eds.), Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional
     Foundations of Comparative Advantage (pp. 387–416). New York: Oxford
     University Press.
Cavalleri, M. C., Eliet, A., McAdam, P., Petroulakis, F., Soares, A., & Vansteenkiste, I.
     (2019). Concentration, market power and dynamism in the euro area. European
     Central Bank.
Chandler, A. D., & Hikino, T. (2009). Scale and scope: The dynamics of industrial
     capitalism. Harvard University Press.
Christophers, B. (2016) (In press). The great leveler: Capitalism and competition in the
     court of law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ciofﬁ, J. W., Kenney, M. F., & Zysman, J. (2022). Platform power and regulatory
     politics: Polanyi for the twenty-ﬁrst century. New Political Economy, 27(5),
     820–836. https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2022.2027355
CMA. (2024). Competition and market power in UK labour markets (1). London:
     Competition and Markets Authority. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
     media/65b2312af2718c000dfb1d13/Competition_and_market_power_in_UK_
     labour_markets.pdf.
Coate, P., & Mangum, K. (2021). Fast Locations and Slowing Mobility. ederal Reserve
     Bank of Philadelphia. https://doi.org/10.21799/frbp.wp.2019.49
Commission Regulation (EU) 1066/2023. (2023). Research & Development Block
     Exemption Regulation. European Commission. Retrieved from https://eur-lex.
     europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32023R1066


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                                1231

Commission Regulation (EU) 2023/1067. (2023). Specialisation Agreement Block
      Exemption Regulation. European Commission. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
      content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32023R1067.
Crouch, C. (1993). Industrial relations and European state traditions. Oxford Uni-
      versity Press.
Darvas, Z., Gotti, G., & Sekut, K. (2023). Trade unions, collective bargaining, and
      income inequality: A transatlantic comparative analysis. In The future of work: A
      transatlantic perspective on challenges and opportunities (pp. 159–187).
      Bruegel. https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2023-03/TEG_ebook_ﬁnal.
      pdf.
Deakin, S., Gindis, D., Hodgson, G. M., Huang, K., & Pistor, K. (2017). Legal
      institutionalism: Capitalism and the constitutive role of law. Journal of
      Comparative Economics, 45(1), 188–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2016.
      04.005
Deeg, R., & Jackson, G. (2007). Towards a more dynamic theory of capitalist variety.
      Socio-Economic Review, 5(1), 149–179. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwl021
De Loecker, J., & Eeckhout, J. (2018). Global market power. National Bureau of
      Economic Research. Working Paper #24768. http://10.3386/w24768. https://
      www.nber.org/system/ﬁles/working_papers/w24768/w24768.pdf.
Del Sorbo, M., Vértesy, D., & Damioli, G. (2018). An EU-US statistical overview:
      Business demography and scaling up comparisons. European Commission, Joint
      Research Centre, Ispra. https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/
      downloadPublic?documentIds=080166e5c0dca59d&appId=PPGMS.
Djelic, M.-L. (2001). Exporting the American model: The postwar transformation of
      European business. Oxford University Press.
Döttling, R., Gutiérrez, G., & Philippon, T. (2017). Is there an investment gap in
      advanced economies? If so, why? NYU Working Paper. Retrieved from https://
      www.ecb.europa.eu/press/conferences/shared/pdf/20170626_ecb_forum/T_
      Philippon_Is_there_an_investment_gap_in_advanced_economies_If_so_why_
      with_R_Dottling_and_G_Gutierrez.pdf
ECN. (2023). “Statistics”. European Competition Network. https://ec.europa.eu/
      competition/ecn/statistics.html
Ergen, T., & Kohl, S. (2019). Varieties of economization in competition policy: In-
      stitutional change in German and American antitrust, 1960–2000. Review of
      International Political Economy, 26(2), 256–286. https://doi.org/10.1080/
      09692290.2018.1563557
European Commission. (1980). Ninth report on competition policy. Retrieved from
      https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/26e12860-4710-46be-
      bcfc-60582d4e51b2/language-en.
European Commission. (2020). Commission Staff Working Document: Evaluation of
      the Vertical Block Exemption Regulation. (SWD/2020/0172 ﬁnal). Retrieved
      from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%
      3A52020SC0172


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1232                                             Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

European Commission. (2021). Evaluation support study on the EU competition rules
      applicable to horizontal cooperation agreements in the HBERs and the Guide-
      lines. Prepared by Valdani, Vicari & Associates, LE Europe and WFO. Retrieved
      from https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/evaluation-support-study-eu-
      competition-rules-applicable-horizontal-cooperation-agreements-hbers-and_en
European Commission. (2022). Communication from the Commission: Guidelines on
      the application of Union competition law to collective agreements regarding the
      working conditions of solo self-employed persons (2022/C 374/02). Retrieved
      from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%
      3A52022XC0930%2802%29
European Commission. (2023). Communication from the Commission: Guidelines on
      the applicability of article 101 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
      Union to horizontal co-operation agreements. European Commission. Retrieved
      from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.C_.
      2023.259.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ%3AC%3A2023%3A259%3ATOC
Fiebig, A. (1999). Crisis cartels and the triumph of industrial policy over competition
      law in Europe. Brooklyn Journal of International Law, 25, 607–638.
Fligstein, N. (1993). The transformation of corporate control. Harvard University Press.
Foster, C. (2022). Varieties of neoliberalism: Courts, competition paradigms and the
      Atlantic divide in anti-trust. Socio-Economic Review, 20(4), 1653–1678. https://
      doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwab050
Foster, C., & Thelen, K. (2023). Brandeis in Brussels? Bureaucratic discretion, social
      learning, and the development of regulated competition in the European Union.
      Regulation & Governance. Advanced Online Publication. https://doi.org/10.
      1111/rego.12570
Galbraith, J. K. (1952). American capitalism: The concept of countervailing power.
      Houghton Mifﬂin.
Gallo, J. C., Dau-Schmidt, K., Craycraft, J. L., & Parker, C. J. (2000). Department of
      Justice antitrust enforcement, 1955-1997: An empirical study. Review of In-
      dustrial Organization, 17(1), 75–133. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1007865923061
Gerber, D. J. (1994). Constitutionalizing the economy: German Neo-liberalism,
      competition law and the “new” Europe. American Journal of Comparative Law,
      42(1), 25–84. https://doi.org/10.2307/840727
Gerber, D. J. (1998). Law and competition in Twentieth century Europe: Protecting
      prometheus. Oxford University Press.
Gifford, D. J., & Kudrle, R. T. (2015). The Atlantic divide in antitrust: An examination
      of US and EU competition policy. University of Chicago Press.
Gillingham, J. (2004). Coal, steel, and the rebirth of Europe, 1945-1955: The Germans
      and French from Ruhr Conﬂict to economic community. Cambridge University
      Press.
Gooberman, L., & Hauptmeier, M. (2022). The adaptation and resilience of employers’
      organizations. In L. Gooberman, & M. Hauptmeier (Eds.), Contemporary em-
      ployers’ organizations: Adaptation and resilience. New York: Routledge.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                                  1233

Grullon, G., Larkin, Y., & Michaely, R. (2019). Are US industries becoming more
     concentrated? Review of Finance, 23(4), 697–743. https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/
     rfz007
Guardiancich, I., & Guidi, M. (2016). Formal independence of regulatory
     agencies and Varieties of Capitalism: A case of institutional complemen-
     tarity? Regulation & Governance, 10(3), 211–229. https://doi.org/10.1111/
     rego.12080
Gutiérrez, G., & Philippon, T. (2017). Declining competition and investment in the US.
     NBER Working Paper No. 23583. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
     Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23583
Gutiérrez, G., & Philippon, T. (2018). How EU markets became more competitive than
     US markets: A study of institutional drift. NBER Working Paper No. 24700.
     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/
     papers/w24700.
Hacker, J. S., Hertel-Fernandez, A., Pierson, P., & Thelen, K. (2022). The American
     political economy: Markets, power, and the meta politics of US economic
     governance. Annual Review of Political Science, 25(1), 197–217. https://doi.org/
     10.1146/annurev-polisci-051120-013916
Haﬁz, H. (2022). The brand defense. Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law,
     43(1), 1–78. https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38B56D557
Hall, P. A., & Soskice, D. (2001). An introduction to varieties of capitalism. In P. A.
     Hall, & D. Soskice (Eds.), Varieties of capitalism: The institutional foundations of
     comparative advantage. Oxford University Press.
Harding, C., & Joshua, J. (2010). Regulating cartels in Europe: A study of legal control
     of corporate delinquency. Oxford University Press.
Hawk, B. E. (1972). Antitrust in the EEC--the ﬁrst decade. Fordham Law Review,
     41(2), 229–292.
Hawley, E. W. (1966). The New Deal and the problem of monopoly: A study in
     economic ambivalence. Princeton University Press.
Hawley, E. W. (1976). Antitrust on the defensive: The American movement for a
     cartelized economy, 1918-33. Reviews in American History, 4(4), 582–587.
     https://doi.org/10.2307/2701435
Hay, C. (2020). Does capitalism (still) come in varieties? Review of International
     Political Economy, 27(2), 302–319. https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2019.
     1633382
Höpner, M., & Schäfer, A. (2012). Embeddedness and regional integration: Waiting for
     Polanyi in a Hayekian setting. International Organization, 66(3), 429–455.
     https://doi.org/10.1017/s002081831200015x
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B. E., Villegas-Sanchez, C., Volosovych, V., & Yesiltas,
     S. (2024). How to construct nationally representative ﬁrm level data from the
     Orbis Global database: New facts on SMEs and aggregate implications for in-
     dustry concentration. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 16(2),
     353–374. https://doi.org/10.1257/mac.20220036


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1234                                             Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

Keller, M. (1981). The Pluralist state: American economic regulation in comparative
     perspective, 1900-1930. In T. K. McCraw (Ed.), Regulation in perspective:
     Historical Essays (p. 65). Harvard University Press.
Khan, L. (2016). Amazon’s antitrust paradox. The Yale Law Journal, 126(3), 710–805.
Killick, J. (2021). Europe takes a tougher approach to technology mergers. White &
     Case, LLP. https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/europe-takes-
     tougher-approach-technology-mergers.
Koltay, G., Lorincz, S., & Valletti, T. M. (2023). Concentration and competition:
     Evidence from Europe and implications for policy. Journal of Competition
     Law and Economics, 19(3), 466–501. https://doi.org/10.1093/joclec/
     nhad012
Kovacic, W. E. (2003). The modern evolution of US competition policy enforcement
     norms. Antitrust Law Journal, 71(2), 377–478.
Kovacic, W. E., & Shapiro, C. (2000). Antitrust policy: A century of economic and
     legal thinking. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1), 43–60. https://doi.
     org/10.1257/jep.14.1.43
Kovaleff, T. P. (1980). Business and government during the Eisenhower adminis-
     tration: A study of the antitrust policy of the Antitrust Division of the Justice
     Department. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Krueger, A. B., & Ashenfelter, O. (2022). Theory and evidence on employer collusion
     in the franchise sector. Journal of Human Resources, 57(S), S324–S348. https://
     doi.org/10.3368/jhr.monopsony.1019-10483
Lamoreaux, N. R. (1988). The great merger movement in American business, 1895-
     1904. Cambridge University Press.
Lancieri, F., Posner, E. A., & Zingales, L. (2022). The political economy of the decline
     of antitrust enforcement in the United States. National Bureau of Economic
     Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w30326.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1998). Law and
     ﬁnance. Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113–1155. https://doi.org/10.
     1086/250042
Larouche, P., & de Streel, A. (2021). The European digital markets act: A revolution
     grounded on traditions. Journal of European Competition Law & Practice, 12(7),
     542–560. https://doi.org/10.1093/jeclap/lpab066
Madrian, B. C. (1994). Employment-based health insurance and job mobility: Is there
     evidence of job-lock? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1), 27–54. https://
     doi.org/10.2307/2118427
McFarland, V., & Colgan, J. D. (2023). Oil and power: The effectiveness of state
     threats on markets. Review of International Political Economy, 30(2), 487–510.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2021.2014931
Milward, A. S. (1984). The reconstruction of western Europe, 1945-51. Routledge.
Monti, G. (2021). Collective labour agreements and EU competition law: Five re-
     conﬁgurations. European Competition Journal, 17(3), 714–744. https://doi.org/
     10.1080/17441056.2021.1930452


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                                 1235

Mueller, W. F. (1967). The Celler-Kefauver Act: Sixteen years of enforcement. US
     Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Nagy, C. I. (2016). EU and US competition law: Divided in unity? The rule on re-
     strictive agreements and vertical intra-brand restraints. Routledge.
Naidu, S., Posner, E. A., & Weyl, G. (2018). Antitrust remedies for labor market power.
     Harvard Law Review, 132(2), 536–601.
Nourry, A., & Rabinowitz, D. (2020). European champions: What now for EU merger
     control after Siemens/Alstom? European Competition Law Review, 41(3),
     116–124.
Orbach, B. Y. (2011). The antitrust consumer welfare paradox. Journal of
     Competition Law and Economics, 7(1), 133–164. https://doi.org/10.1093/
     joclec/nhq019
Ordóñez-De-Haro, J. M., Borrell, J. R., & Jiménez, J. L. (2018). The European
     Commission’s ﬁght against cartels (1962–2014): A retrospective and forensic
     analysis. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies, 56(5), 1087–1107. https://
     doi.org/10.1111/jcms.12708
Paul, S. (2020). Antitrust as allocator of coordination rights. UCLA Law Review, 67(2),
     378–431.
Peinert, E. (2023). Monopoly politics: Price competition, learning, and the evolution of
     policy regimes. World Politics, 75(3), 566–607. https://doi.org/10.1353/wp.2023.
     a900713
Philippon, T. (2019). The great reversal: How America gave up on free markets.
     Harvard University Press.
Phillips Sawyer, L. (2018). American fair trade: Proprietary capitalism, corpo-
     ratism, and the “New Competition,” 1890–1940. Cambridge University
     Press.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Harvard University Press.
Pistor, K. (2019). The code of capital: How the law creates wealth and inequality.
     Princeton University Press.
Posner, E. A. (2020). The antitrust challenge to covenants not to compete in em-
     ployment contracts. Antitrust Law Journal, 83(1), 165–200.
Posner, E. A. (2021). How antitrust failed workers. Oxford University Press.
Posner, R. A. (1970). A statistical study of antitrust enforcement. The Journal of Law
     and Economics, 13(2), 365–419. https://doi.org/10.1086/466698
Posner, R. A. (1979). The Chicago School of antitrust analysis. University of
     Pennsylvania Law Review, 127(4), 925–948. https://doi.org/10.2307/
     3311787
Pryor, F. L. (2001). New trends in US industrial concentration. Review of Industrial
     Organization, 18(3), 301–326. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1007888323241
Quack, S., & Djelic, M.-L. (2005). Reinforcement: The story of antitrust and com-
     petition law in Germany and Europe. In Thelen, K. and Streeck, W., eds. Beyond
     continuity: Institutional change in advanced political economies (pp. 255–281).
     New York: Oxford University Press.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

1236                                             Comparative Political Studies 58(6)

Roy, W. G. (1999). Socializing capital: The rise of the large industrial corporation in
      America. Princeton University Press.
Sanders, E. (1986). Industrial concentration, sectional competition, and antitrust
      politics in America, 1880–1980. Studies in American Political Development, 1,
      142–214. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0898588x00000353
Schröter, H. (1996). Cartelization and decartelization in Europe, 1870-1995: Rise and
      decline of an economic institution. Journal of European Economic History, 25(1),
      129–153.
Schröter, H. (2013). Cartels revisited: An overview on fresh questions, new methods,
      and surprising results. Revue Économique, 64(6), 989–1010. https://doi.org/10.
      3917/reco.646.0989
Schweitzer, H. (2008). The history, interpretation and underlying principles of Sec.
      2 Sherman act and art. 82 EC. In C.-D. Ehlermann, & M. Marquis (Eds.), Eu-
      ropean competition law annual: 2007 A reformed approach to article 82 EC
      (pp. 119–164). Hart Publishing.
Shanahan, M., & Fellman, S. (2022). A history of business cartels: International
      politics, national policies and anti-competitive behaviour. Taylor & Francis.
Sklar, M. J. (1988). The corporate reconstruction of American capitalism, 1890-1916:
      The market, the law, and politics. Cambridge University Press.
Šmejkal, V. (2015). Competition law and the social market economy goal of the EU.
      International Comparative Jurisprudence, 1(1), 33–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      icj.2015.10.002
Spillman, L. (2012). Solidarity in strategy: Making business meaningful in American
      trade associations. University of Chicago Press.
Staszak, S. (2020). Privatizing employment law: The expansion of mandatory arbi-
      tration in the workplace. Studies in American Political Development, 34(2),
      239–268. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0898588x20000061
Streeck, W. (2009). Re-forming capitalism: Institutional change in the German po-
      litical economy. Oxford University Press.
Teubner, G. (2001). Legal irritants: How unifying law ends up in new divergences.
      In P. A. Hall, & D. Soskice (Eds.), Varieties of capitalism: The institutional
      foundations of comparative advantage (pp. 417–442). Oxford University
      Press.
Thatcher, M. (2014). European Commission merger control: Combining competition
      and the creation of larger European ﬁrms. European Journal of Political
      Research, 53(3), 443–464. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12040
Thelen, K. (2020). Employer organization and the law: American exceptionalism in
      comparative perspective. Law and Contemporary Problems, 83, 23–48.
Thelen, K. (2024). Attention, shoppers!: American retail capitalism and the origins of
      the Amazon economy. Princeton University Press.
Tilly, R. (1982). Mergers, external growth, and ﬁnance in the development of large-
      scale enterprise in Germany, 1880–1913. The Journal of Economic History, 42(3),
      629–658. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0022050700027984


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster and Thelen                                                               1237

Traxler, F. (2004). Employer associations, institutions and economic change: A
     crossnational comparison. Industrielle Beziehungen/The German Journal of
     Industrial Relations, 11(1/2), 42–60.
Waller, S. W. (2004). The antitrust legacy of Thurman Arnold. St. John’s Law Review,
     78(3), 569–614.
Watkins, M. W. (1961). Electrical equipment antitrust cases: Their implications for
     government and for business. University of Chicago Law Review, 29(1), 97–110.
     https://doi.org/10.2307/1598521
Webb, S. B. (1980). Tariffs, cartels, technology, and growth in the German steel
     industry, 1879 to 1914. The Journal of Economic History, 40(2), 309–330. https://
     doi.org/10.1017/s0022050700108228
Wells, W. (2001). Antitrust and the formation of the postwar world. Columbia
     University Press.
Wigger, A., & Nölke, A. (2007). Enhanced roles of private actors in EU business
     regulation and the erosion of Rhenish capitalism: The case of antitrust en-
     forcement. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies, 45(2), 487–513. https://
     doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5965.2007.00719.x
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism. Free Press.
Wu, T. (2018). The Supreme Court devastates antitrust law. The New York Times.
     https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/26/opinion/supreme-court-american-express.
     html#:∼:text=With_its_ﬁve_more_conservative,are_blatantly_anticompetitive_
     and_raise
Yeh, C., Macaluso, C., & Hershbein, B. (2022). Monopsony in the US labor market.
     American Economic Review, 112(7), 2099–2138. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.
     20200025


Author Biographies
Chase Foster is Lecturer of Public Policy and Management at SOAS Uni-
versity of London and incoming Lecturer in Politics at King’s College
London. His book manuscript, Trust on Trial: Competition Law, Coordination
Rights, and the Making of Modern Capitalism comparatively examines how
competition law shaped the development of capitalism in Europe and the
United States during the long 20th century.
Kathleen Thelen is Ford Professor of Political Science at MIT. Her most
recent books are The American Political Economy: Politics, Markets, and
Power (with Jacob Hacker, Alexander Hertel-Fernandez, and Paul Pierson,
2022) and Attention, Shoppers! American Retail Capitalism and the Origins
of the Amazon Economy (2024).

